.. highlight:: none

.. |N2| replace:: N\ :sub:`2`
.. |O2| replace:: O\ :sub:`2`

***************************************************
Excitation energies of diatomic molecules
***************************************************

In this section, we show how to compute the first electronic
excitation energies and oscillator strengths of three diatomic
molecules, namely NO, |N2| and |O2|. These simple examples cover three
different spin multiplicities of the ground state: doublet, singlet
and triplet, respectively.

Nitrogen molecule
=================

[Input: `recipes/linresp/diatomic/N2`]

First, we examine the |N2| case. This is a close-shell diatomic
molecule. We are interested in the low-lying electronic transitions to
excited states with both singlet and triplet multiplicities. The
solution of the Casida equation is performed after a single-point
(static) DFTB ground-state calculation for the optimised geometry. All
this is done in a single DFTB run (one single input file). The
`dftb_in.hsd` input file should look like this::

  Geometry = GenFormat {
      <<< "geo_in.gen"
  }

  Driver = {}

  Hamiltonian = DFTB {

      SCC = Yes
      SCCTolerance = 1.0E-10
      MaxAngularMomentum = {
          N = "p"
      }
      SlaterKosterFiles = Type2FileNames {
          Prefix = "../../../slakos/mio-ext/"
          Separator = "-"
          Suffix = ".skf"
      }
      SpinConstants = {
          N = {-0.026} # HOMO Wpp
      }
  }

  ExcitedState {
      Casida {
          NrOfExcitations = 10
          Symmetry = both
          Diagonaliser = Arpack{}
      }
  }

The input shows a standard spin-unpolarised static DFTB calculation,
except for a new block denoted as ``ExcitedState`` with an embedded
subblock called ``Casida``. Once the SCC loop is converged, this block
instructs DFTB+ to build the response matrix according to Casida,
using the just-obtained DFTB orbitals and energies, and diagonalise
it.

Apart from this new block, there is another unusual thing in our
input. The Hamiltonian block contains the spin constants, although our
calculation is not spin-polarised. Those are actually not used for the
ground state calculation, but necessary for the computation of the
triplet excitations. That is, if we would be only interested in
singlet transitions, we could just omit the spin constants in the
input file.

Let us now take a closer look at the ``Casida`` block. The keyword
``NrOfExcitations`` specifies how many transitions per spin symmetry, or
multiplicity, we want to compute. In ``Symmetry`` we specify the
multiplicity of the transition (either singlet, triplet or both). The
multiplicity of the transition is the difference between the
multiplicities of the excited state and the ground state. In our
example, we are instructing DFTB+ to calculate the first 10
excitations with singlet symmetry and the first 10 excitations with
triplet symmetry. Since the |N2| ground state has multiplicity 1, this
means the first 10 singlet-to-singlet and 10 singlet-to-triplet
transitions.

Once the calculation is finished (it takes a fraction of a second),
the output file `EXC.DAT` contains the excitation energies and
oscillator strengths, as well as other valuable information. It should
look like this::


    w [eV]       Osc.Str.         Transition         Weight      KS [eV]    Sym.

  ================================================================================

     7.321        0.00000000         4   ->     7        0.648       9.014      T
     8.118        0.00000000         5   ->     7        1.000       8.118      T
     8.118        0.00000000         5   ->     6        1.000       8.118      T
     9.014        0.00000000         4   ->     6        0.826       9.014      T
     9.014        0.00000000         3   ->     6        0.715       9.014      T
     9.014        0.00000000         3   ->     7        0.930       9.014      T
    12.062        0.00000000         2   ->     6        0.997      12.062      T
    12.062        0.00000000         2   ->     7        0.997      12.062      T
    22.118        0.00000000         1   ->     6        0.795      22.118      T
    22.118        0.00000000         1   ->     7        0.795      22.118      T
     8.118        0.00000000         5   ->     7        0.804       8.118      S
     8.118        0.00000000         5   ->     6        0.804       8.118      S
     9.014        0.00000000         3   ->     7        0.911       9.014      S
     9.014        0.00000000         4   ->     6        0.969       9.014      S
     9.014        0.00000000         4   ->     7        0.772       9.014      S
    12.062        0.00000000         2   ->     7        0.978      12.062      S
    12.062        0.00000000         2   ->     6        0.978      12.062      S
    12.750        0.80120458         3   ->     6        0.647       9.014      S
    22.118        0.00000000         1   ->     6        0.884      22.118      S
    22.118        0.00000000         1   ->     7        0.884      22.118      S


The triplet transitions are listed first, followed by the singlet
ones. They can be identified by the letter ``T`` or ``S`` in the last
column.

The first column ``w [eV]`` is the excited state energy we are looking
for, the second one ``Osc.Str.`` lists the corresponding oscillator
strength. The column ``Transition`` reports the indices of the dominant
molecular orbitals involved in the electronic transition. In our
example, the singlet state at 12.75 eV features a transition from the
occupied Kohn-Sham orbital 3 (HOMO-2) to the virtual orbital 6 (the
LUMO). The next column ``Weight`` indicates the weight of the
corresponding singly excited determinant in the CIS expansion of the
excited state. Values close to one indicate that the excited state is
well described by a single electronic excitation, while small values
speak for a collective excitation. Column ``KS [eV]`` provides the
Kohn-Sham transition energy difference :math:`\omega_{ia\sigma} =
\epsilon_{a\sigma} - \epsilon_{i\sigma}` (see above).

Oxygen molecule
=================

[Input: `recipes/linresp/diatomic/O2`]

For the |O2| molecule, we will consider its triplet ground state. This
is specified in the input file through the
``Hamiltonian/SpinPolarisation`` block::

  SpinPolarisation = Colinear {
      UnpairedElectrons = 2
  }

Our excited state block will in this case looks like this::

  ExcitedState {
      Casida {
          NrOfExcitations = 10
          Diagonaliser = Arpack{}
      }
  }

We are instructing DFTB+ to compute the first 10 excitations. Note
that since our system is not closed-shell, we can no longer separate
our eigenvalue problem into two independent singlet and triplet
equations, so we have to build and diagonalise the entire response
matrix in this case. But, how do we know the spin multiplicities of
the computed transitions? We get this information from the last column
of the `EXC.DAT` file::

  w [eV]       Osc.Str.         Transition         Weight      KS [eV]    D<S*S>

  ================================================================================

   6.353        0.00000000      5   ->     6        0.829       6.353     0.000
   6.353        0.00000000      4   ->     6        0.787       6.353     0.000
   6.353        0.00000000      5   ->     7        0.722       6.353     0.000
   6.793        0.00000000      3   ->     6        0.993       6.793     0.000
   6.793        0.00000000      3   ->     7        0.993       6.793     0.000
   8.204        0.23976646      4   ->     7        0.617       6.353     0.007
  14.567        0.00000000      2   ->     7        0.989      14.567     0.000
  14.567        0.00000000      2   ->     6        0.989      14.567     0.000
  22.424        0.00000000      6   ->     8        0.800      22.424     0.000
  22.424        0.00000000      7   ->     8        0.800      22.424     0.000

In the last column are the expectation values of the square of the
total spin operator for the transitions. A value of zero means we have
a singlet transition (triplet to triplet). Note that we may have
transitions with some spin contamination (transitions leading to
unphysical states). In our next example, we will explore this in more
detail.

Nitric oxide molecule
=====================

[Input: `recipes/linresp/diatomic/NO`]

Finally, we have the NO molecule, with one unpaired electron (doublet
ground state). The symmetry of NO leads to degenerate orbitals, which
causes problems with the SCC convergence.  We therefore additionally
provide a small electronic temperature to ease the ground state
computation::

  Filling = Fermi {
        Temperature [K] = 40
  }

NOTE: If your structure features a band gap, it is typically neither
necessary nor advisable to set the electronic temperature different
from 0 K. The code also works with fractional occupations, but the
response matrix will be much larger then necessary and this will cause
long calculations. In addition, the memory need increases
significantly.



In this case, the first 10 excitations are::

  w [eV]       Osc.Str.         Transition         Weight      KS [eV]    D<S*S>

  ================================================================================

  7.478        0.00209868      4   ->     7        0.556       8.534     1.418
  7.772        0.00000000      5   ->     6        1.000       7.772    -0.000
  7.772        0.00000000      5   ->     7        1.000       7.772    -0.000
  7.793        0.00000000      5   ->     6        0.779       7.793     0.999
  7.793        0.00000000      5   ->     7        0.779       7.793     0.999
  8.534        0.00000000      4   ->     6        0.707       8.534     0.999
  8.534        0.00000000      3   ->     6        0.728       8.534     0.999
  8.636        0.00000000      4   ->     6        0.984       8.636     0.000
  8.636        0.00000000      3   ->     7        0.657       8.636    -0.000
 11.652        0.49971991      3   ->     6        0.600       8.636    -0.597

Let us pay attention to the last column of the `EXC.DAT`
file. Contrary to the previous case, here we obtain large non-zero
:math:`\Delta S^2` values. When :math:`\Delta S^2 = 0`, we are in the
presence of a doublet-to-doublet transition. Likewise, if
:math:`\Delta S^2 = 2`, we would have an excitation to a quadruplet
state. Otherwise, we have some extent of spin contamination in our
obtained transitions. The last column should help us determine which
excitations are to be trusted. We can set an arbitrary spin
contamination threshold to establish which transitions we will
consider leading to a physical excited state.  In our ``NO-TiO2``
recipe, we will compute the absorption spectrum of a system where
transitions with a spin contamination beyond an imposed threshold are
excluded.
