.. highlight:: none

**************************************
Absorption spectrum of a macromolecule
**************************************

[Input: `recipes/linresp/macromolecule/`]

In this recipe, we increase significantly the dimension of our system,
and hence of our eigenvalue problem. The structure in question is
:math:`C_{66}O_{10}N_{4}H_{44}`.  This is a more realistic target
system for a TD-DFTB calculation. Our goal is to compute the
absorption spectrum of this molecule up to energies of approximately 1
Hartree.  To cover this energy range, we will need to obtain the first
20 singlet excitation energies and oscillator strengths. This is
computed as usual::

  ExcitedState {
      Casida {
          NrOfExcitations = 20
          Symmetry = singlet
          Diagonaliser = Arpack{}
      }
  }

After obtaining the energy and oscillator strength pairs (takes very
few minutes), we can use a simple script to plot the absorption
spectrum. The script (`spectrum.py`) is provided in the input folder
and requires Python 3.  Simply run::

  python spectrum.py > abs.dat

and plot the content of `abs.dat` with your graphing tool of
preference.  The script employs a Lorentzian function for the spectral
broadening, with a full width at half-maximum parameter of
:math:`\Gamma` = 0.2 eV. Specifically, what is plotted is the molar
extinction coefficient, defined as

.. math:: \varepsilon(\omega) = \sum_I \frac{f_{I}}{C\pi}
   \frac{\Gamma/2}{(\omega-\omega_I)^2 + (\Gamma/2)^2}

The sum runs over all computed excitations :math:`I`, with energy
:math:`\omega_I` and oscillator strength :math:`f_I`. The factor
:math:`C` = 3.5 Ã— :math:`10^{-5}` M cm/eV.

Windowing
=========

For the study of excitations with low-to-medium collective character,
as in our example, it is possible to reduce considerably the dimension
of the response matrix by disregarding Kohn-Sham (KS) transitions with
small coupling to the excitations in question. This can be achieved in
practice by systematically discarding those orbital pairs
:math:`\phi_{p\sigma}` and :math:`\phi_{q\sigma}` with energy
differences :math:`\epsilon_{p\sigma} - \epsilon_{q\sigma}` far away
from the excitation energies of interest. In DFTB+, this is done by
defining an energy windows that sets a threshold for all KS
transitions entering the Casida equation. For the computation of
excitation energies, energy windows can often be set to be fairly
small, without losing accuracy. On the other hand, for the study of
absorption spectra, energy windows need to be defined larger, as
oscillator strengths are much more sensitive to even small values of
the off-diagonal elements of the response matrix. However, DFTB+
offers the possibility to select transitions based on both energy and
oscillator strength values. Thus, additionally to the energy window,
it is possible to define an oscillator strength cutoff in the
calculations. Our experience tells us that with the combination of
both truncations, the dimension of the response matrix can be reduced
significantly more than with the use of only the energetic constraint,
for a given accuracy.

For our macromolecule, we will set an energy cutoff of 0.1 Hartree
beyond the energy region of interest (defined by the first 20
single-particle transitions and roughly equal to 1 Hartree). As for
the oscillator strength window, we will use a cutoff of
:math:`10^{-3}`. These values ensure a negligible loss of accuracy in
the optical spectra, while reducing the computation time by roughly
half. Those are specified in the ``Casida`` block using the
``EnergyWindow`` and ``OscillatorWindow`` keywords::

  ExcitedState {
      Casida {
          NrOfExcitations = 20
          Symmetry = singlet
          EnergyWindow = 0.1
          OscillatorWindow = 0.001
          Diagonaliser = Arpack{}
      }
  }

The resulting spectra with and without truncation of the KS transitions can be
observed in the following figure:

.. figure:: ../_figures/linresp/macromol_abs.png
   :height: 36ex
   :align: center
   :alt: Molar extinction coefficient vs energy.


We have also provided TD-DFT results using the PBE functional and a
triple-Z plus polarisation basis set for comparison. To put this into
perspective, we needed roughly five days to obtain the PBE spectra
under the same computational conditions.
